# The amazing spreadsheet
Hi, again. I'm glad you're back. In this part of the program, we'll revisit the spreadsheet. Spreadsheets are a powerful and versatile tool, which is why they're a big part of pretty much everything we do as data analysts. There's a good chance a spreadsheet will be the first tool you reach for when trying to answer data-driven questions. After you've defined what you need to do with the data, you'll turn to spreadsheets to help build evidence that you can then visualize, and use to support your findings. Spreadsheets are often the unsung heroes of the data world. They don't always get the appreciation they deserve, but as a data detective, you'll definitely want them in your evidence collection kit. I know spreadsheets have saved the day for me more than once. I've added data for purchase orders into a sheet, setup formulas in one tab, and had the same formulas do the work for me in other tabs. This frees up time for me to work on other things during the day. I couldn't imagine not using spreadsheets. Math is a core part of every data analyst's job, but not every analyst enjoys it. Luckily, spreadsheets can make calculations more enjoyable, and by that, I mean easier. Let's see how. Spreadsheets can do both basic and complex calculations automatically. Not only does this help you work more efficiently, but it also lets you see the results and understand how you got them. Here's a quick look at some of the functions that you'll use when performing calculations. Many functions can be used as part of a math formula as well. Functions and formulas also have other uses, and we'll take a look at those too. We'll take things one step further with exercises that use real data from databases. This is your chance to reorganize a spreadsheet, do some actual data analysis, and have some fun with data.

# Get to working
Data analysts spend a lot of time organizing data and performing calculations. Luckily, there's lots of different tools to help them do just that, including spreadsheets. In this video we'll take a look at some of the ways data analysts use spreadsheets to help them with their day to day responsibilities. Later, you'll get to test out some of these things yourself, but for now, let's start with a quick look at how data analysts use spreadsheets to do their jobs. This will change depending on the work you need to complete. But here's an overview of a few of the major tasks. Imagine you work for a construction company. Your company needs your spreadsheet skills to analyze some data about their expenses, so you access the appropriate data and add it to your spreadsheet. We won't cover all the details of this project right now, but you will get a chance to see lots of spreadsheet features up close and personal as we move forward. What do you do with the data now that it's in your spreadsheet? Again, this will be different for each job, but you might start by organizing your data with the task you've been given. For example, you might put your data in a pivot table. We've talked about pivot tables before in this course. We'll cover them in more detail later on, but for now, just think of them as well organized and very useful tables. Next, you might filter the data in the pivot table. Sorting and filtering data is a common part of most jobs. This lets you focus only on the data you'll need for your analysis. In our example, maybe you only need the expenses for a certain time frame, like the last three months. After you filtered your data, you could perform some calculations to learn more about it. Maybe you need to find out which construction projects ended up costing the most money. This is where formulas and functions are really handy. We'll talk about them in just a bit, but formulas and functions are great for doing some quick math, especially once you run out of fingers and toes to count on. Now you've seen some of the ways data analysts are using spreadsheets in their day to day work for a lot of different tasks, including organizing their data and making calculations. Before you know it we'll have you working in your own spreadsheets.

# Spreadsheets and the data life cycle
To better understand the benefits of using spreadsheets in data analytics, let’s explore how they relate to each phase of the data life cycle: plan, capture, manage, analyze, archive, and destroy.

illustration of the phases of the data analytics life cycle as a circular graphic
Plan for the users who will work within a spreadsheet by developing organizational standards. This can mean formatting your cells, the headings you choose to highlight, the color scheme, and the way you order your data points. When you take the time to set these standards, you will improve communication, ensure consistency, and help people be more efficient with their time.

Capture data by the source by connecting spreadsheets to other data sources, such as an online survey application or a database. This data will automatically be updated in the spreadsheet. That way, the information is always as current and accurate as possible.

Manage different kinds of data with a spreadsheet. This can involve storing, organizing, filtering, and updating information. Spreadsheets also let you decide who can access the data, how the information is shared, and how to keep your data safe and secure.

Analyze data in a spreadsheet to help make better decisions. Some of the most common spreadsheet analysis tools include formulas to aggregate data or create reports, and pivot tables for clear, easy-to-understand visuals.

Archive any spreadsheet that you don’t use often, but might need to reference later with built-in tools. This is especially useful if you want to store historical data before it gets updated.

Destroy your spreadsheet when you are certain that you will never need it again, if you have better backup copies, or for legal or security reasons. Keep in mind, lots of businesses are required to follow certain rules or have measures in place to make sure data is destroyed properly.

# Step-by-step in spreadsheets
We've talked about how spreadsheets are great for organizing data and performing calculations. Now, it's time to get our hands dirty and start building a real spreadsheet. In this video, I'm going to demonstrate some basic tasks we know data analysts use spreadsheets for, including entering and organizing data. We'll start with a step-by-step process to show you some tools to organize your data in a spreadsheet. Consider these steps the basics. You won't always have to use them when working with a data set, but if your data is a bit messy when you get it, these steps can help you get it ready for analysis. Let's start by opening a new spreadsheet. As a data analyst, you might not start with a blank spreadsheet, but it's good to know how to do it, just in case. Start by opening Excel, Google Sheets or whatever spreadsheet software you're using, then select a new blank file. The first thing you'll want to do when you open a new spreadsheet is give it a title. Here's a pro tip. Make your title short, clear, and have it state exactly what the data in the spreadsheet is about. Trust me, it'll make searching for it a lot easier. Creating a folder on your computer specifically for spreadsheets and related files can also make it easier to find them. For this spreadsheet, it's already saved in our drive. So we'll open our File menu to click Move.
Play video starting at :1:26 and follow transcript1:26
Then we'll create a new folder, name it "Population Data,"
Play video starting at :1:36 and follow transcript1:36
and move the spreadsheet there.
Play video starting at :1:41 and follow transcript1:41
Our spreadsheet now has a new home. This will save you a lot of unnecessary clicks and headaches when you look for this file. There's a few different ways data analysts get data they work with. Depending on the job, you might use data from an open source, you might be given data to work with or you might be asked to find your own data. You'll experience all of these later in the program. There's a lot of open data sources online, where data is made available to the public. For example, we'll use data from worldbank.org, that's already in the spreadsheet. The data shows the population of Latin American and Caribbean countries from 2010-2019. Let's open this spreadsheet. Time to get the data ready for analysis. We'll start by selecting the whole sheet and making our columns wider by dragging the boundary of one of the columns.
Play video starting at :2:37 and follow transcript2:37
This will help us see the data clearly, then we can adjust any individual columns that need it. You can make columns wider in other ways as well, but this will work for now. The first row of the spreadsheet is for data attributes or variables. It's basically labeling the type of data in each column. Let's make the attributes stand out from the rest of the rows by selecting it and filling it with color. We'll also make the labels bold.
Play video starting at :3:10 and follow transcript3:10
If we want to add another data attribute between two of the other attributes, we can always add a new column. Just click on any cell within a column and use the Insert menu to add a new one.
Play video starting at :3:29 and follow transcript3:29
It will appear next to the column you originally clicked, pretty simple. Deleting a column is just as simple. To delete, right-click in a cell in the column you want to get rid of. The steps we're showing may be different depending on the spreadsheet program you're using, but should be pretty similar. Let's add one more thing to our data table: borders. This can help you see each piece of data more clearly. To add borders start by clicking the Select All button at the top left corner of your spreadsheet. This is like a magic button because you can click it whenever you need to make changes to every cell in your spreadsheet. Then click the Border button in the menu, and choose the type of borders you want. To keep our spreadsheets uniform, we'll choose borders for all cells. Just like that, we've gone from raw to refined. Now our spreadsheet is filled with data and it's nice to look at too. Using these organization tools before you analyze can help you focus on the data once you start your analysis. Now that we've gone over some ways spreadsheets can be used to organize data, you're ready to start working on them yourself. Later you'll learn more about spreadsheets, including some common errors and how to fix them.

# Learn more about spreadsheet basics
Below, you will find a list that covers two types of spreadsheet programs: Microsoft Excel and Google Sheets. The list includes quick-start guides, tutorials, and more. The examples in this course use Google Sheets, but you can follow along using Excel or any other spreadsheet application. The user interface might be a little different, but it should look and work similarly.

An image of 3 spreadsheets side by side. The spreadsheet in the middle is slightly faded.
Microsoft Excel
Office Quick Starts: Scroll down to the Downloadable guides section to download the Excel Quick Start Guide: This PDF guide begins with a labeled map of Excel that can guide you through the basic tasks you can accomplish in Excel. For tips on starting and opening Excel, this Microsoft Support page will show you how to begin a new workbook.

Excel video training: This is a collection of step-by-step videos to use all sorts of Excel features, including adding and working within rows, columns, and cells; formatting; using formulas and functions; and adding charts and pivot tables.

Sort data in a range or table: This page guides you through all of the steps you will need to sort data by number, text, and color. You’ll also have the option to sort by custom list so that you can customize exactly what you want to sort.

Filter data in a range or table: This article has step-by-step instructions on how to filter an Excel spreadsheet to show only the data you want to see. You can also use built-in comparison operators, such as “greater than” and “top 10” to reveal only the most relevant data.

Format a worksheet: The guide will help you select and format your Excel spreadsheet, then change the borders, shading, colors, and text. This can help improve your spreadsheet’s readability.

Pro tip: If you’re searching for information about using customizable options, check out Microsoft’s Guidelines for organizing and formatting data on a worksheet. This article provides clear methods for creating easy-to-read spreadsheets.

Google Sheets
Google Sheets cheat sheet: The cheat sheet puts all the basics of Sheets on a single page for easy reference. Here, you can learn about customizing your spreadsheet and the data inside; working with rows, columns, and cells; sharing your spreadsheet with others; creating different versions and copies of a spreadsheet; and more.

Get started with Sheets: Create and import files: This guide is a step-by-step guide for working with Sheets. You start by learning how to open a spreadsheet, then move on to adding data.

Sort and filter your data: This resource can help you organize data in Sheets. Use this guide to sort part or all of a spreadsheet. You can sort by text, number, and color. Then, learn how to create filters to show only certain data while hiding the rest. Finally, the article includes information on creating, saving, and removing a filter view.

Edit and format a spreadsheet: This will help you make easy-to-read spreadsheets. You will learn how to assign a color, customize borders around cells, and change the appearance of text. If you’d like to give your spreadsheet a theme, you can scroll to the bottom of the page and find how to apply it to parts of your spreadsheet.

Tip: Microsoft Excel and Google Sheets are very similar in terms of calculations, formulas, functions, and many other features. But there are some differences, which can make it tricky to switch from one to the other. If you are moving between Excel and Google Sheets, find a quick list of the differences between the two kinds of spreadsheet applications in Overview: Differences between Sheets and Excel.
